Back to Dynamics: Designing Sequence Models Through Their State Dynamics

English research blog, based on draft.md and the file structure of Part I.
Entry point: index.html. Open directly in a browser; no build step is needed.

Narrative
  State evolution -> continuous generators -> LinOSS / Mamba -> DeltaNet / KDA
  -> CKDA -> PG-19 and LongBench-E -> MDN -> single-step spectral limits
  -> CyFA -> dynamics as a design dimension.
  Derivations precede model summaries. DeltaNet, Gated DeltaNet, KDA, CKDA, MDN,
  and CyFA each end with a concise dynamics summary. Supplemental CyFA readout
  details remain in a native, keyboard-accessible details element.
  The evaluations open with the long-context observation from our Mamba-3 blog,
  followed by tests of officially released CKDA and KDA models on both benchmarks.
  The conclusion places the model-scope paragraph before the open design questions.
  The conclusion does not claim oscillatory dynamics are always better. It treats
  state dynamics as one design dimension beyond memory decay and erasure. End in
  bold with:
  "Memory has a lifetime, but it also has a trajectory."

Files
  index.html                         English article, equations, complete results
  assets/stylesheets/mamba-base.css   Existing Clarity base with local fonts
  assets/stylesheets/mamba.css        Existing Part I visual style
  assets/stylesheets/dynamics.css     Part II layout and responsive math/table rules
  assets/scripts/dynamics.js          Local formula rendering and keyboard scrolling
  assets/scripts/dynamics-demo.js     Shared-decay interactive state dynamics
  assets/scripts/pair-limit-demo.js   One-pair and two-pair frequency comparison
  assets/scripts/transport-demo.js    Slot and Fourier views of cyclic transport
  assets/vendor/katex/               KaTeX 0.19.0, fonts, MIT license
  assets/papers/understanding-mamba3.pdf  Copy of the paper distributed with Part I
  static/dynamics/pg19-ckda-kda.png    Web rendering of the supplied PDF
  figures/pg19_ckda_kda.pdf           Original evaluation figure
  data/longbench_e_ckda_kda_tasks.csv  Original task scores
  draft.md                           Original source draft

Evidence and wording
  LongBench-E: 13 tasks, 3,668 examples per model. Macro averages are unweighted
  means of the task scores: CKDA 13.90230769, KDA 12.75076923, difference 1.15153846.
  CKDA leads on 8 of 13 tasks. The horizontal table displays only model scores.
  Task abbreviations match Part I, with full names available in header tooltips.
  Scores are rounded to two decimals. Exact values, deltas, and example counts
  remain in the CSV. The article omits example counts, the delta row, and
  source/export notes to keep the focus on state dynamics.
  These are task metrics, not a shared accuracy measure.

  PG-19: the original PDF labels the comparison as 1.3B and displays 2K to 64K.
  CKDA has lower perplexity at every displayed length. The advantage is not
  monotonic in length. No point values were estimated or digitized from the image.
  The 4K reference line agrees with the training context reported in the CKDA
  paper, Table 5. Exact evaluated checkpoint IDs, evaluation scripts, decoding
  settings, PG-19 sample counts, and uncertainty estimates are not in the supplied
  artifacts; the article does not invent them or claim statistical significance.
  The evaluation introduction links to the authors' official Hugging Face model
  collection, which includes CKDA and KDA. It does not assert exact checkpoint IDs.

  Mamba-3 comparison checked against ../arxiv/sections/experiments/train.tex:
  187M and 444M; 100B FineWeb-Edu tokens; 2K training context; PG-19 up to 64K.
  Both scales benefit in PG-19 perplexity. LongBench-E: 444M 10.61 -> 13.22;
  187M 9.76 -> 9.53 (without -> with oscillation).

  Spectral counts refer to a frozen single-head, single-column transition.
  The one-pair bound does not apply unchanged to multi-step products or entire
  networks. CKDA/KDA checkpoint comparisons do not isolate oscillation causally.
  Linked original papers were checked for the architecture and spectrum claims.

Maintenance
  Keep derivations before conclusions, with model takeaways in the blue summary
  boxes. CKDA's one-pair proof is shown directly without a root-counting heading.
  CKDA's necessary-condition proof also appears before its summary. Symmetry
  excludes non-real eigenvalues when beta <= 1 or every gate is nonnegative,
  including zero gates. Negative gates and beta > 1 are necessary, not sufficient.
  Keep CKDA concise: one rotation example, the two necessary conditions, and
  the one-pair bound. Show short proofs directly before the final summary.
  Prove MDN's one-pair bound directly from its scalar-gated recurrence. Project
  onto the key and orthogonal directions, derive the triangular orthogonal
  blocks, and compute the key block's quadratic. Keep the method citation
  at introduction, without an appendix or theorem citation as the proof.
  Keep this explanation compact with three displayed equations: the update,
  the two types of blocks, and the key block's characteristic polynomial.
  The limits section uses two target speeds, 20 and 50 degrees per step. Its
  interactive frequency demo compares two linear readouts of one 2D oscillatory
  state with readouts from two independent oscillatory states. It uses retention
  0.98 and a 24-step horizon, with the same initial phase for every signal.
  The one-pair slider changes a shared frequency. The two-pair view matches each
  target independently. Actual readouts are blue dashed curves, Target A is
  purple, and Target B is orange. Keep their legends and headings consistent.
  This is an illustration of fixed oscillatory states,
  not a simulation or evaluation of a trained CKDA or MDN checkpoint.
  The formal claim remains exact one-step dynamics with fixed injective linear
  state encoding. Keep the short eigenvector proof and the multi-head / multi-step
  scope. Static curves and explanatory text remain visible without JavaScript.
  The CyFA demo keeps a two-column, two-row comparison at every screen width.
  CyFA's coupled-controls explanation focuses on fixed frequency ratios and
  the (m-1)/2 pair count for odd m. Keep this paragraph within CyFA, without
  comparison to CKDA/MDN or discussion of commutativity and overall expressivity.
  Top: five-slot signed states without and with fractional cyclic shift.
  Bottom: the same states' two cosine-sine Fourier pairs in an orthonormal basis.
  Initialize only slot zero with [1, 0, 0, 0, 0], with unit state norm.
  Both columns use retention 0.95. The right shifts 0.5 slots per step by default.
  The initial preview is step 0. Reset returns to the single write in slot zero.
  Step and shift sliders synchronize all views. Derive both initial
  cosine-sine pairs and the DC coefficient from the orthonormal real Fourier
  transform of this profile. Rotate pair j by 2*pi*j*delta*n/5, decay by 0.95^n,
  and reconstruct the slot state exactly. This is the fractional cyclic shift,
  not linear interpolation between neighbors. DC also decays by 0.95^n.
  Both Fourier plots use the same fixed display scale. The slot and complete
  Fourier states have equal norms. Static geometry remains visible without JS.
  Playback is opt-in, stops at step 10, and suspends off-screen or in background
  tabs. The animation interpolates the fixed transition between integer steps.
  Use periods or conjunctions instead of semicolons in article prose. Keep HTML
  source in multiline format, and use \quad rather than \qquad in formulas.
  Prefer concrete descriptions over abstract transitions and repeated summaries.
  Keep proofs readable while preserving their assumptions and fixed-transition scope.
  Paper citations use author-year links at the first method introduction and for
  specific attributed results. References are alphabetical by first author, with
  full author lists (or Kimi Team), year, title, and venue or preprint identifier.
  Keep the public blog URL in both the inline BibTeX and citation.bib.
  Conference entries use the publication year; PG-19 cites the 2019 arXiv version.
  Keep each paper-citation data-reference value matched to its reference entry ID.
  The opening demo compares decay and oscillation with exp(-a t) for both state
  norms. Keep its card at a maximum width of 680px, with plots capped at 240px
  on desktop and 180px on mobile. Use compact padding and control spacing.
  Oscillation adds a planar rotation, completing one cycle in eight time
  units at rotation speed 1. Playback starts on request, ends at t=12,
  and suspends when off-screen or in a background tab. Sliders redraw the current
  elapsed time; Reset restores the initial state and default parameters.
  Edit prose and LaTeX in index.html. Inline math uses backslash-parentheses;
  display math uses backslash-brackets. Escape HTML-sensitive characters within
  formulas as &lt;, &gt;, and &amp;, especially matrix alignment ampersands.
  Keep the PG-19 figure centered at a maximum width of 440px, fitting smaller
  screens. Its top margin and the preceding paragraph's bottom margin are 8px.
  Keep horizontal overflow inside individual equation containers. The two Mamba-3
  equations use aligned two-line layouts so they remain readable when the page is
  zoomed or viewed on a narrow screen. Version the dynamics stylesheet URL when
  responsive rules change so the published page does not reuse stale CSS.
  Keep the closing design-comparison table centered at a maximum width of 820px.
  Its prose cells wrap normally, with fixed columns, 14px text and 8px vertical
  padding on desktop. Use 13px text and 6px vertical padding on small screens.
  If the CSV changes, update the table, macro averages, deltas, and prose together.
  Regenerate the PNG with Ghostscript:
    gs -q -dSAFER -dBATCH -dNOPAUSE -sDEVICE=png16m -r300 \
       -dTextAlphaBits=4 -dGraphicsAlphaBits=4 \
       -sOutputFile=static/dynamics/pg19-ckda-kda.png figures/pg19_ckda_kda.pdf
  Fonts, formula rendering, results, and the paper are local. Part I links use
  ../blog/clarity-template-main/; preserve that sibling directory or update the
  links when publishing elsewhere. Clarity attribution and its license remain.
